To:	Dungeon Players
From:	"The Translator"
Subj:	Game Hints
Date:	1-Jan-90

This document provides hints about V3.x of Dungeon.

Dungeon is a development prototype of the game ZORK(tm), which is
available commercially from Infocom, Inc, on most personal computers.
Copyright on the Dungeon sources is retained by Infocom, and commercial
use is strictly prohibited.  ZORK(tm) is a trademark of Infocom, Inc.

Over the last decade, Dungeon Maintenance has received hundreds of
letters requesting maps, clues, hints, or other forms of relief from
the game's many frustrations.  No maps are available, and requests for
hints have generally received only cryptic responses.  The following
are the most frequently asked questions, and the most frequently sent
answers:

1.  How do I open the egg?

    You cannot open the egg; perhaps someone else can.

2.  How do I enter Hades?

    You must first exorcise the demons; are you properly equipped?

3.  How do I get the platinum bar?

    You must disable the echo.

4.  How do I pass the glacier?

    The glacier swells with heat.  Have you found anything fiery?

5.  How do I work the well?

    If the well won't bring you water, you could try bringing water
    to the well.

6.  How do I recover a treasure from the gnome, or the gold card
    from the Puzzle Room slot?

    You can't.  In general, the CORRECT solution to a problem NEVER
    requires the surrender of a treasure.

7.  How do I work the rainbow?

    Have you tried your magic wand?  Have you FOUND your magic wand?

8.  What good is the barrel?

    The barrel is for joy riders.  If you have always wanted to go for
    a ride in a barrel, try "Geronimo".

9.  How does the Bank of Zork work?

    The Bank of Zork is built on illusions.  Walls are one of the key
    illusions.

10. How do I get to the endgame?

    You must win the main game (get all possible points).

and in honor of V3.0:

11. How do I get the last point?

    Have you availed yourself of ALL opportunities for intellectual
    improvement?
